# Full-stack Healthcare System

## Overview
For this project, I created a three-tier web application that serves as a hospital book-keeping information system and maintains the health records of the patients which are accessible only by authorized persons such as physicians, nurses and receptionists. The health records maintain two sets of information about patients: visitation records and lab tests. The purpose of this project is to explore the process of building a simple end-to-end web application with a database layer, application containing business logic with backend API, and frontend client.

## Tech Stack
Before building the application, I explored what technologies I could utilize for each aspect of the project. Starting with the database, I wanted to use a relational SQL database, so set up a MySQL container on Docker. I chose to use Docker for hosting my MySQL because I personally find it easier to manage. Moving to the backend application, I used Java as this is what this course was based on, and I wanted to take this opportunity to learn more about Java. I used Java servlets for the API and deployed the application using Apache Tomcat and Maven. With the frontend client, I wanted to either use Svelte (because I wanted to learn a new frontend framework) or React (due to my previous experience). Due to time constraints, I stuck with what I knew and chose React. As a personal preference, I also went with Tailwind for styling and TypeScript for static typing.

## Implementation
For development, I worked on each tier of the application separately, and I started with the database, before moving on to the backend/API then frontend client. Setting up the database involved creating the schema and designing the entities and the relationships between them. This process included considering how the physician and nurse interacted with the patients and their data. After creating and seeding the database, I created a database handler class in Java so that the backend application could interact with the database. The backend application (Clinic class) encapsulated the core business logic of the project. The goal was to design a modular application so that it could be used interchangeably with a web application or a desktop application.

With the completed application that allows users to access healthcare data based on their roles, it was time to move on to move on to the API. I first created a ClinicServlet that maps the business logic functions to be accessible by the frontend. To pass JSON objects in the response body, I used Gson, a Java library made by Google, to convert Java objects to JSON. Then I created an AuthServlet that handles user authentication using cookies, so I revisited the ClinicServlet to be restricted for only authenticated users. I also implemented a CORS filter to restrict API usage to specific domains. After testing the API routes using Postman, I moved on to the frontend.


To start with the frontend, I created a React application and added the routing and layouts for the web pages. The first feature I fully built out was authentication. I made an AuthProvider that tracked the current user and persisted user sessions using the cookies from the AuthServlet. With the authentication completed, I moved on to the role restricted pages where I created the main dashboard user interface. The receptionist dashboard allows the user to search for patients or physicians while the physician/nurse dashboard allows the user to search for a patient’s lab test(s) and visit record(s). It is worth noting that the role restrictions were implemented on both the frontend and backend. With these pages completed, the web application was fully developed and integrated.

## Challenges
The first challenge that I encountered was related to building and managing the Java application. As I am inexperienced with the Java ecosystem, I found this to be a difficult task until I came across Maven. Using Maven, I was able to quickly build a Java servlet application and easily deploy it on a local Apache Tomcat server. The second issue I ran into included handling authentication and user sessions with servlet cookies. While it was complicated to figure out, it was extremely easy to use once understood as I already knew how to handle authentication and persistent sessions on the frontend.

## Conclusion & Next Steps
Building this healthcare system provided a positive opportunity to work on a web application and to explore new technologies. I signed up for this course to learn more about web applications as well as Java, and that is exactly what I accomplished. Previously, I did not know how to build an API using Java. In addition, there’s always room to learn more, so if I were to continue working on this project I would start by creating features that encompass data mutations such as creating lab tests, visit records, and new patients. Then, I would follow up with trying to deploy the application.


